Clipboardchange event explainer document (#850)
MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers: ClipboardAPI/clipboard-change-event-explainer.md

2. Still requires monitoring for a brief period after focus loss, which could lead to resource usage if many pages implement this.
Example: Multiple tabs monitoring clipboard changes for 5 seconds could still cause a temporary spike in resource usage.

#### 5.2.4 Conclusion
We favour Approach 1 - Page required to be in focus to receive event, since this approach is inline with the current Async clipboard APIs and also reduces the possibility of misusing the clipboard change event in privacy related attacks. Also the approach has relatively lower resource usage.

### 5.3 Event details 
Since the clipboardchange event is not triggered by a user action and the event is not associated to any DOM element, hence this event doesn't bubbles and is not cancellable.

There are two ways to get the changed clipboard data within the event handler:

1. Async Clipboard API - The [read](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#dom-clipboard-read) or [readText](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#dom-clipboard-readtext) methods of the [Async clipboard API](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#async-clipboard-api) can be used to get the current contents of the system clipboard.

> 2. DataTransfer API - The clipboardchange event is a [ClipboardEvent](https://www.w3.org/TR/clipboard-apis/#clipboard-event-interfaces) that includes a [DataTransfer](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/dnd.html#datatransfer) object. This keeps the interface of this event consistent with other clipboard related events like [cut](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#clipboard-event-cut), [copy](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#clipboard-event-copy) or [paste](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#clipboard-event-paste) events. The [getData](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/dnd.html#dom-datatransfer-getdata) method of DataTransfer interface can be used to retrieve the clipboard contents of a specific format.

Reviewer: Hi! Regarding the option to contain the changed data in the event, I'm not sure of that's a great idea from two perspectives:
- Single responsibility: The purpose of this event is to notify *that* change(s) happened, not necessary *what* change(s). Filling this field with contents of the clipboard would duplicate the functionality of `navigator.read*` and provide yet another way to read the clipboard. Also, [clipboardData](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#clipboard-event-interfaces:~:text=%3F%20clipboardData%3B%0A%7D%3B-,clipboardData,-The%20clipboardData%20attribute) field documentation seems to suggest that it's to be used for copy, cut and paste events (in which this could be used to modify the data before it reaches its destination).
- Efficiency and accuracy: Filling an event with clipboard contents after every change and sending such event to every site that has the clipboard permission sounds like it could be really inefficient, especially in case of a big clipboard size. And this data might not even be relevant - for example, if the app would like to explicitly react by reading the clipboard using `navigator.clipboard.read` with specified `formats`, this might be entirely useless.

Author: Thanks for reviewing. It does make sense to have this event not inherit the ClipboardEvent interface due to the reasons you mentioned. I will update the doc accordingly.

Reviewer: I mean, for consistency with the whole Clipboard Event API I would keep this event as an instance of the ClipboardEvent class - but it might be a good idea to take advantage of the fact that this field is null by default and just not set it:
`DataTransfer? clipboardData = null;`
Alternatively, like in [this case](https://source.chromium.org/chromium/chromium/src/+/main:third_party/blink/renderer/core/editing/commands/clipboard_commands.cc;drc=7bf0ba43d87a09d7a866a78cec04986d957747b8;l=189) - an already existing example of not filling this field - just put there an empty object.

Author: Agree

##### Pros
1. This approach aligns with the security model for other clipboard APIs and similar APIs that allow access to sensitive information.
2. Ensures user consent before accessing clipboard data.

##### Cons
1. This approach imposes a small restriction on web authors as they have to call a clipboard read API method before starting to listen for the clipboardchange event.

#### 5.1.2 Approach 2 - No permission required
Since no data is being sent as part of the clipboardchange event, it can be argued that we don't need any permission to simply know when clipboard contents change. This will simplify the user flow as they don't need to explicitly ask for permissions before listening to the event.

##### Pros
1. Simpler implementation and user experience

##### Cons
1. Open to privacy attacks which simply monitor clipboard changes without user consent.

> Example - Untrusted sites can perform phishing attacks like - A user copies a URL to share with a friend, but the clipboard content is replaced with a phishing link that looks similar to the original URL.

Reviewer 2: I think the main con is simply that a site will be able to monitor the clipboard - a privileged OS component - without the user explicitly allowing it. That may be interpreted as a user privacy violation. It's also worth noting that the author would only know that the clipboard changed, but wouldn't have any details about the payload.

#### 5.2.3 Approach 3 - Transient user activation
This approach allows the clipboardchange event to be fired for a short duration after the user loses page focus, such as up to 5 seconds. This ensures that clipboard changes occurring immediately after focus loss are still captured, enhancing user experience without compromising security.

##### Pros:
1. Clipboard changes occurring immediately after the user loses focus are still captured, ensuring the web app can respond promptly when the user returns.
Example: A web app can pre-process clipboard data while the user is in another application, reducing wait time when the user comes back.
2. Limits the duration for which clipboard monitoring is allowed after focus loss, reducing the risk of prolonged unauthorized access.

##### Cons:
1. The short duration might not be sufficient for some use cases where clipboard changes occur after the specified time.
2. Still requires monitoring for a brief period after focus loss, which could lead to resource usage if many pages implement this.
Example: Multiple tabs monitoring clipboard changes for 5 seconds could still cause a temporary spike in resource usage.

#### 5.2.4 Conclusion

> We favour Approach 1 - Page required to be in focus to receive event, since this approach is inline with the current Async clipboard APIs and also reduces the possibility of misusing the clipboard change event in privacy related attacks. Also the approach has relatively lower resource usage.

Reviewer 2: If async clipboard read switched to depending on transient user activation instead of document focus (we are discussing this), should `clipboardchange` do the same?

Author: If read is switched to depend on transient user activation, I think we should change the clipboardchange event to do the same. However, if write is changed but not read, then even the clipboardchange event's behavior should stay the same. Write is less privacy impacting than read since read can allow anyone to access private data but write only modifies it. clipboardchange event can be thought of as a subset to read capability

Reviewer 2: In that case, should we update this section to mention more directly that we want the permissions model for the `clipboardchange` event to align with that of the read API?

        - [Pros](#pros-2)
        - [Cons](#cons-2)
      - [5.2.2 Approach 2 - No focus requirement](#522-approach-2---no-focus-requirement)
        - [Pros:](#pros-3)
        - [Cons:](#cons-3)
      - [5.2.3 Approach 3 - Transient user activation](#523-approach-3---transient-user-activation)
        - [Pros:](#pros-4)
        - [Cons:](#cons-4)
      - [5.2.4 Conclusion](#524-conclusion)
    - [5.3 Event details](#53-event-details)
  - [6 Appendix](#6-appendix)
    - [6.1 APIs provided by all OS to listen to clipboardchange event:](#61-apis-provided-by-all-os-to-listen-to-clipboardchange-event)
  - [7 References \& acknowledgements](#7-references--acknowledgements)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## 1. Introduction

The clipboardchange event fires whenever the system clipboard contents are changed. This allows web-apps like remote desktop clients to be notified and respond to changes to the system clipboard. It provides an efficient alternative to polling the clipboard for changes.

## 2. User scenarios

### 2.1 Scenario: Sync clipboard with a remote desktop

> When a user copies text or an image on their local machine, the web-based remote desktop application can detect that clipboard contents have changed by listening for the `clipboardchange` event. Upon detecting the change, the application can re-read the clipboard and send the updated clipboard content to the remote desktop environment.

Reviewer 3: Might be good to add in this scenario that the page is focused (as concluded in 5.2), otherwise it may sound like you're changing focus requirements for this API.

Author: Makes sense, I've added this point

##### Pros:
1. Clipboard changes occurring immediately after the user loses focus are still captured, ensuring the web app can respond promptly when the user returns.
Example: A web app can pre-process clipboard data while the user is in another application, reducing wait time when the user comes back.
2. Limits the duration for which clipboard monitoring is allowed after focus loss, reducing the risk of prolonged unauthorized access.

##### Cons:
1. The short duration might not be sufficient for some use cases where clipboard changes occur after the specified time.
2. Still requires monitoring for a brief period after focus loss, which could lead to resource usage if many pages implement this.
Example: Multiple tabs monitoring clipboard changes for 5 seconds could still cause a temporary spike in resource usage.

#### 5.2.4 Conclusion
We favour Approach 1 - Page required to be in focus to receive event, since this approach is inline with the current Async clipboard APIs and also reduces the possibility of misusing the clipboard change event in privacy related attacks. Also the approach has relatively lower resource usage.

### 5.3 Event details 

> Since the clipboardchange event is not triggered by a user action and the event is not associated to any DOM element, hence this event doesn't bubbles and is not cancellable.

Reviewer 3: Nit: did you mean `doesn't bubbles` -> `doesn't bubble up`?

Author: Yes, thanks for pointing

Web apps can request for the clipboard-read permissions by performing a read operation using one of [read](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#dom-clipboard-read) or [readText](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#dom-clipboard-readtext) methods of the [Async clipboard API](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#async-clipboard-api). Reading the clipboard before starting to listen to clipboard changes (to build the intial state) is a typical sequence of actions in web apps that would use the "clipboardchange" event.

> In future, we may have additional ways of prompting the user for permissions - 1) By explicitly requesting for "clipboard-read" permission, the API for this is still under discussion (https://github.com/w3c/permissions/issues/158). 2) The user can be prompted for permissions as soon as the "addEventListener" method is called with "clipboardchange" in case the permissions are not already granted. This is still open for discussion as it is not a common pattern to prompt user for permissions when attaching event listeners. 3) The user can be prompted for permissions just before the browser dispatches the "clipboardchange" event. This way, the permissions prompt would appear only when required by the browser however web authors won't have control over when the prompt would be triggered which might not be desirable.  

Reviewer 2: Consider moving this paragraph into an "Open issues" section at the bottom.

##### Pros
1. Since clipboard can be changed by a user action, the information regarding when the clipboard has changed can be considered a user private data. Having the permissions check ensures that this privacy sensitive information is protected by user consent.
2. This approach aligns with the security model for other clipboard APIs.

##### Cons
1. This approach imposes a small restriction on web authors as they have to call a clipboard read API method before starting to listen for the clipboardchange event.

##### 5.1.1.1 Permissions policy integration in iframe and fencedframe

Listening to "clipboardchange" event within a cross-origin iframe can be enabled with [Permissions Policy](https://www.w3.org/TR/permissions-policy) which allows for selectively enabling and disabling specific browser features and APIs. Specifically, "clipboard-read" permission needs to be passed to the "allow" attribute of the iframe, similar to how this is required for accessing async clipboard read APIs within a cross-origin iframe.

```html
<iframe
    src="https://other-domain.com/will-monitor-clipboard.html"
    allow="clipboard-read;"
>
</iframe>
```

> This event is not accessible within a "fencedframe" since the clipboard and the clipboardchange event could be used as a communication channel between the host and the fencedframe, so constitute a privacy threat.

Reviewer 2: Fenced frames are a Chromium-only concept and other browsers may not work this way. Do you just mean to say "cross-origin iframe" here? If so, please update the term and how to handle cross-origin iframes can be tracked as an open issue.

Author: Moved to open issues

### 5.2 Page focus requirement
As per the [current spec](https://www.w3.org/TR/clipboard-apis/#clipboard-event-clipboardchange), we should not fire "clipboardchange" event when a page is not is focus. This is in-line with the current behavior where async clipboard API is not accessible unless the given page is in focus. We do fire "clipboardchange" event when the page regains focus, incase the clipboard contents had changed when the page was out of focus. Note that even if the clipboard had changed multiple times while the page was out of focus, we will only fire a single "clipboardchange" event when the page regains focus. This is because the event is designed to indicate that the clipboard contents are different from what they were when the page lost focus, rather than tracking every individual change that occurred while the page was out of focus.

#### 5.2.1 Approach 1 (Preferred) - Page required to be in focus to receive event

##### Pros
1. This is in-line with current async clipboard focus APIs which require focus to access.

> 2. Can simplify implementation since browsers can simply check for clipboard change on page focus. However, this needs to be further investigated.

Reviewer 2: "However, this needs to be further investigated." -> We should elaborate on what is meant here or simply exclude this statement.

> # Clipboardchange event explainer document

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# clipboardchange event API explainer
```

    - [5.2.2 Approach 2 - No focus requirement](#522-approach-2---no-focus-requirement)
      - [Pros:](#pros)
      - [Cons:](#cons)
    - [5.2.3 Conclusion](#523-conclusion)
  - [5.3 Event details](#53-event-details)
- [6. Detailed design discussion](#6-detailed-design-discussion)
  - [6.1 Listen to clipboard change directly from the OS](#61-listen-to-clipboard-change-directly-from-the-os)
      - [Pros:](#pros-1)
      - [Cons:](#cons-1)
    - [6.1.1 APIs provided by all OS to listen to clipboardchange event:](#611-apis-provided-by-all-os-to-listen-to-clipboardchange-event)
  - [6.2 Considered alternative: Given the page focus restrictions, check clipboard hash change when page regains focus](#62-considered-alternative-given-the-page-focus-restrictions-check-clipboard-hash-change-when-page-regains-focus)
    - [6.2.1 Platform support for getting clipboard SequenceNumber/Version number](#621-platform-support-for-getting-clipboard-sequencenumberversion-number)
      - [Pros:](#pros-2)
      - [Cons:](#cons-2)
- [7. References & acknowledgements](#7-references--acknowledgements)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## 1. Introduction

> The clipboardchange event fires whenever the system clipboard contents are changed. This allows web-apps like remote desktop clients to stay in sync with the system clipboard. It provides an efficient alternative to polling the clipboard for changes.

Reviewer 2: "This allows web-apps like remote desktop clients to stay in sync with the system clipboard." -> "Staying in sync" implies reading the clibpoard, which this API doesn't provide the ability to do. Maybe we should say "allows web apps to be notified and respond to changes to the system clipboard".

## 2. User scenarios

### 2.1 Scenario: Sync clipboard with a remote desktop

> When a user copies text or an image on their local machine, the web-based remote desktop application can detect this clipboard change event through the browser's Clipboard API. Upon detecting the change, the application can automatically send the new clipboard content to the remote desktop environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a user copies text or an image on their local machine, the web-based remote desktop application can detect that clipboard contents have changed by listening for the `clipboardchange` event. Upon detecting the change, the application can re-read the clipboard and send the updated clipboard content to the remote desktop environment.
```

![](img/sync-clipboard-scenario.png)

### 2.2 Scenario: Show available paste formats in web based editors

> Web based editors like Excel Online, Word Online may support paste operation in multiple formats. Within the UI, it may show the available formats like csv, image or plain text. The clipboard change event can be used to detect the change in available formats in clipboard and reflect the same on the UI as soon as it is changed. 

Reviewer 2: Consider adding screenshots of the paste menu UI alongside the app names for Excel Online, Word Online, etc. That might make it easier for readers to grasp what is being described here.

Reviewer 2: It might also be worth adding an example from a non-Microsoft web app, ex. Google Sheets, to showcase that this is a problem that broadly impacts the web.

#### 2.2.1 Copy multiple cells in a spreadsheet should show multiple paste options
![](img/paste-format-1.png)

#### 2.2.2 Copy plain text should show only single paste option
![](img/paste-format-2.png)

> Similarly UI elements which depend on clipboard state, like "Paste image from clipboard" in an web based image editor, can be enabled/disabled using the clipboardchange event based on weather correct data format is present in clipboard or not.

Reviewer 2: Can we add a screenshot for this?

Author: Couldn't find any web app which has a similar UI. If there is no such app, should we remove this part from the explainer?

## 3. Motivation - Alternative to inefficient polling of clipboard
Today, a web-app can monitor the system clipboard by polling and reading the clipboard through async clipboard API at regular intervals.
However, polling is not efficient and this feature aims to introduce an efficient way of notifying web apps when clipboard changes.
Additionally we must ensure that we monitor the clipboard only when absolutely required, that is, there is at least one document having required permissions and is listening to the clipboard change event. This will be described in design details.

## 4. Example javascript code for detecting clipboard changes:

```javascript
  function callback(event) {
      // Read clipboard contents using navigator.clipboard
      navigator.clipboard.readText().then(text => console.log(text));
  }
  // Start listening to the clipboardchange event
  navigator.clipboard.addEventListener("clipboardchange", callback);
```

## 5. Event spec details and open questions

### 5.1 User permission requirement

#### 5.1.1 Approach 1 - clipboard-read permission required to listen to clipboardchange event

> Since the clipboard contains privacy-sensitive data, we should protect access to the clipboard change event using a user permission - clipboard-read. The web author should ensure that the site has the permission before it starts listening to this event otherwise the provided event handler won't be invoked whenever the clipboard changes. We should consider logging a warning message if the web author starts listening to clipboardchange without acquiring the permissions since web developers might miss integrating the permissions flow into their user experience.

Reviewer 2: "The web author should ensure that the site has the permission before it starts listening to this event otherwise the provided event handler won't be invoked whenever the clipboard changes." How can a web author know if a site has the required permissions or not? Is there an API that can be used to query this user choice?

Reviewer 2: "web developers might miss integrating the permissions flow into their user experience" -> The permissions flow implemented and enforced by the browser, not the site. Right?

Author: Yes, there is an API for checking if the current user has clipboard-read permissions for the site:

navigator.permissions.query({ name: "clipboard-read" }) (https://www.w3.org/TR/permissions/#query-method_)

The permissions flow is NOT enforced by the clipboardchange event unless we decide to prompt user for permissions as soon as they start listening to the event.

Users can request permissions in two ways - 1) By performing a read operation like read or readText using Async clipboard API. 2) By explicitly requesting "clipboard-read" permission, the API for this is still under discussion (https://github.com/w3c/permissions/issues/158)

##### Pros
1. More defensive approach, guards against potential misuse of clipboard change event.
2. Ensures user consent before accessing clipboard data.

##### Cons
1. Not a clear user flow for requesting permissions.

> 2. Additional complexity for both implementation and web authors.

Reviewer 2: Could you clarify what specific complexity you're referring to?

> To simply further, we can prompt user for permissions as soon as the "addEventListener" method is called with "clipboardchange" in case the permissions are not already granted. This is still open for discussion as it is not a common pattern to prompt user for permissions when attaching event listeners.

Reviewer 2: Should this be another approach, like 5.1.2?

### 5.2 Page focus requirement
As per the [current spec](https://www.w3.org/TR/clipboard-apis/#clipboard-event-clipboardchange), we should not fire "clipboardchange" event when a page is not is focus. This is in-line with the current behavior where async clipboard API is not accessible unless the given page is in focus. We do fire "clipboardchange" event when the page regains focus, incase the clipboard contents had changed when the page was out of focus. Note that even if the clipboard had changed multiple times while the page was out of focus, we will only fire a single "clipboardchange" event when the page regains focus. This is because the event is designed to indicate that the clipboard contents are different from what they were when the page lost focus, rather than tracking every individual change that occurred while the page was out of focus.

#### 5.2.1 Approach 1 - Page required to be in focus to receive event

##### Pros
1. More defensive and prevents background scripts from misuse of clipboardchange events.\

> 1.a) Example - Malicious scripts can detect when a cryptocurrency wallet address is copied to clipboard and replace it with attacker's address and that way redirect payment to attacker's account.  

Reviewer 2: It would be great if we can use an example from the use cases we listed previously.

Author: I can't think of malicious use of the clipboardchange from the listed use cases - remote desktop clipboard sync and rich web editors. Maybe in case of remote desktop sync, a bad actor running natively on the remote machine can misuse clipboard change notifications triggering in the background of client's local machine, however in that case the remote desktop webapp can prevent sending clipboard updates to the remote machine when page is out of focus.

##### Cons:
1. Might be open to misuse - a web app will be able to monitor the clipboard even when the user is interacting with other applications / pages.
2. Not much useful unless the page focus requirement is removed from the async read/write clipboard API.
3. Could lead to higher resource consumption due to continuous monitoring. E.g. if a large number of pages are listening to the clipboardchange event, when the clipboard is changed, then all the pages will receive the event at once, which might put load on the system.

#### 5.2.3 Conclusion
We favour Approach 1 - Page required to be in focus to receive event, since this approach reduces the possibility of misusing the clipboard change event in privacy related attacks.

### 5.3 Event details 

> "clipboardchange" is a system level event, hence it is not bound to any DOM element. Therefore, there is no bubbling associated with the event. This event simply signifies that the system clipboard got changed. Hence performing “preventDefault” for this event has no effect since there are no actions associated with it. The event does not provide any additional arguments in the callback handler - it is expected that the web app calls Async API to read the clipboard and get the changed clipboard contents within the callback.

Reviewer 2: What does "system level" event mean? Is that a spec'ed term?

Reviewer 2: "it is expected that the web app calls Async API to read the clipboard and get the changed clipboard contents within the callback" -> Is it at all possible to use the `clipboardchange` event with the DataTransfer API? If it is, we should mention how that could work with pros and cons, and justifying why the async clipboard API is recommended. If it isn't, perhaps we should mention that explicitly.

Author: Removed the term system level and clarified that it is not bound to any DOM element. Added details about DataTransfer API

## 6. Detailed design discussion

### 6.1 Listen to clipboard change directly from the OS

> In this approach, the browser process can have a singleton service which listens to clipboard change event using OS specific APIs. If the platform doesn't provide any OS specific APIs, then we can consider polling to obtain the clipboard change event. 

Reviewer 2: Browser process, renderer process are Chromium architecture concepts. Not all browsers are built with this architecture and these are not spec'ed concepts. These shouldn't be included in an explainer and instead should be moved to a Chromium specific implementation design doc.

We can further optimize the page out of focus scenario as follows - when the page looses focus, we stop listening to clipboardchange event from the OS. Then upon regain of focus, we firstly check if the clipboard got changed by comparing clipboard hash using [SequenceNumber API](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/winuser/nf-winuser-getclipboardsequencenumber) and then fire a clipboardchange event if the hash is different from the previously stored one. Secondly, we restart listening to the clipboardchange event from the OS. This will help reduce system resource consumption since the browser won't need process every clipboard change event which is occurring in the OS, while the browser is not in focus.

Moreover, we can ensure to only listen to the OS clipboard when there is at least one renderer process interested in the event.

> High level design doc available [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1bY2pzV6PSX56fiFcrXEgOjpFen07xaxmnsM5dqXFE1U/edit#heading=h.i1vomwqlf6kt)

Reviewer 2: Explainers are the starting point for specifications. They shouldn't link to design docs or browser implementation details. This can be linked in the Chrome Status entry and I2P.

## 2. Motivating Use Cases and scenarios

### 2.1 Scenario: Sync clipboard with a remote desktop
When a user copies text or an image on their local machine, the web-based remote desktop application can detect this clipboard change event through the browser's Clipboard API.
Upon detecting the change, the application can automatically send the new clipboard content to the remote desktop environment.

### 2.2 Scenario: Show available paste formats in web based editors
Web based editors like Excel Online, Word Online may support paste operation in multiple formats. Within the UI, it may show the available formats on the UI (like csv, image, plain text). The clipboard change event can be used to detect the change in available formats in clipboard and reflect the same on the UI as soon as it is changed. 

Similarly UI elements which depend on clipboard state, like "Paste image from clipboard" in an web based image editor, can be enabled/disabled using the clipboardchange event based on weather correct data format is present in clipboard or not.

### 2.3 Alternative to inefficient polling of clipboard

> Today, a web-app can still monitor the system clipboard by polling and reading the clipboard through async clipboard API at regular intervals. 

Reviewer 4: Proposing the following, can you please evaluate: 

"Today, a web-app can monitor the system clipboard by polling and reading the clipboard through async clipboard API at regular intervals. 
 However, polling is not efficient and this feature aims to introduce an efficient way notifying web apps when clipboard changes.
 Additionally we must ensure we monitor the clipboard only when absolutely required, that is, there is at least one document having required permissions and is listening to the clipboard change event. This will be described in design details."

Author: Sounds good, updated the content with very minor changes.

## 2. User scenarios

### 2.1 Scenario: Sync clipboard with a remote desktop
When a user copies text or an image on their local machine, the web-based remote desktop application can detect that clipboard contents have changed by listening for the `clipboardchange` event. Upon detecting the change, the application can re-read the clipboard and send the updated clipboard content to the remote desktop environment.

![](img/sync-clipboard-scenario.png)

### 2.2 Scenario: Show available paste formats in web based editors
Web based editors like Excel Online, Word Online may support paste operation in multiple formats. Within the UI, it may show the available formats like csv, image or plain text. The clipboard change event can be used to detect the change in available formats in clipboard and reflect the same on the UI as soon as it is changed. 

#### 2.2.1 Copy multiple cells in a spreadsheet should show multiple paste options
![](img/paste-format-1.png)

> #### 2.2.2 Copy plain text should show only single paste option

Author: Mentioned excel online which is the web app being shown here

Web apps can request for necessary permissions in the following ways: 

1) By performing a read operation using one of [read](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#dom-clipboard-read) or [readText](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#dom-clipboard-readtext) methods of the [Async clipboard API](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#async-clipboard-api). 

2) By explicitly requesting "clipboard-read" permission, the API for this is still under discussion (https://github.com/w3c/permissions/issues/158)

3) The user can be prompted for permissions as soon as the "addEventListener" method is called with "clipboardchange" in case the permissions are not already granted. This is still open for discussion as it is not a common pattern to prompt user for permissions when attaching event listeners.

##### Pros

> 1. More defensive approach, guards against potential misuse of clipboard change event.

Author: Alignment with existing API sounds good, I'll add that. 

Having the permissions gate won't completely prevent misuse of the API but it still adds a layer of security i.e. reduces the possibility of misuse. I didn't explain exactly how the permission gate is helping. Do you think I sgiykd mention that when the user is prompted for permissions, it brings awareness to the users that their clipboard is being monitored and that they should copy sensitive data to clipboard with caution while the web app is still open.

2. Ensures user consent before accessing clipboard data.

##### Cons
1. Not a clear user flow for requesting permissions.

> 2. Adds complexity for web authors, as they must create a scenario to request clipboard-read permission from the user.

Author: reworded it

#### 5.2.1 Approach 1 - Page required to be in focus to receive event

##### Pros
1. More defensive and prevents background scripts from misuse of clipboardchange events.\
1.a) Example - Malicious scripts can detect when a cryptocurrency wallet address is copied to clipboard and replace it with attacker's address and that way redirect payment to attacker's account.  

> 1.b) Example - Passwords / authentication keys / access tokens are frequently copied to clipboard and can be retrieved by malicious scripts reading clipboard in background.

Author: Yes. These are under the assumption that we can access read or write APIs without the page focus constraint. I should have mentioned it but I anyways have removed these points as discussed in your other comment

2. Not much useful unless the page focus requirement is removed from the async read/write clipboard API.
3. Could lead to higher resource consumption due to continuous monitoring. E.g. if a large number of pages are listening to the clipboardchange event, when the clipboard is changed, then all the pages will receive the event at once, which might put load on the system.

#### 5.2.3 Conclusion
We favour Approach 1 - Page required to be in focus to receive event, since this approach reduces the possibility of misusing the clipboard change event in privacy related attacks.

### 5.3 Event details 
Since the clipboardchange event is not triggered by a user action and the event is not associated to any DOM element, hence this event doesn't bubbles and is not cancellable.

There are two ways to get the changed clipboard data within the event handler:

1. Async Clipboard API - The [read](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#dom-clipboard-read) or [readText](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#dom-clipboard-readtext) methods of the [Async clipboard API](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#async-clipboard-api) can be used to get the current contents of the system clipboard.

> 2. DataTransfer API - The clipboardchange event is a [ClipboardEvent](https://www.w3.org/TR/clipboard-apis/#clipboard-event-interfaces) that includes a [DataTransfer](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/dnd.html#datatransfer) object. This keeps the interface of this event consistent with other clipboard related events like [cut](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#clipboard-event-cut), [copy](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#clipboard-event-copy) or [paste](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#clipboard-event-paste) events. The [getData](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/dnd.html#dom-datatransfer-getdata) method of DataTransfer interface can be used to retrieve the clipboard contents of a specific format. However, it is recommended to use the Async Clipboard API because it is asynchronous and prevents the page from freezing when reading large clipboard contents.

Reviewer 2: "However, it is recommended to use the Async Clipboard API because it is asynchronous and prevents the page from freezing when reading large clipboard contents." -> I think this is just a general "pitch" to use the async clipboard API instead of the DataTransfer API. Right? While that may be true, if that is tangential to the `clipboardchange` event, I would recommend excluding it from the document. Otherwise, it can create the impression that `clipboardchange` event does work as well with the DataTransfer API as the async clipboard API, which I don't think is what we are going for.

> ## 6. Detailed design discussion

Reviewer 2: I think this section is more about the implementation than the spec so can be largely left out of the explainer. The links to the OS APIs (ie. section 6.1.2) may still be useful reference material. Perhaps we can include that in an appendix-like section?

Author: In the spec template there was a detailed design discussion section which I added here (Section 6). Are you referring to parts of the DataTransfer API section ?

| Linux         | TBD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| ChromeOS      | TBD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Android / iOS | TBD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

### 6.2 Considered alternative: Given the page focus restrictions, check clipboard hash change when page regains focus

> On page focus event, we can check the current hash of the clipboard (using a [SequenceNumber API](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/winuser/nf-winuser-getclipboardsequencenumber)) and compare it with the previously stored hash to infer if the clipboard changed. This is an alternative to directly using OS provided APIs for monitoring clipboard. For clipboard changes occurring within the browser, we can easily obtain the clipboard change event from within the browser.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this captures why the alternative was considered but rejected. Could you add why this approach doesn't work?

> #### 6.2.1 Platform support for getting clipboard SequenceNumber/Version number

Reviewer 2: Is this also supposed to be a "considered alternative"? If so, can it also be labeled as such?

Author: 6.2 is already labelled as "considered alternative".  6.2.1 is providing more information for 6.2 hence didn't add "considered alternative" here. Should I still add the label here ?

### 5.2 Page focus requirement
As per the [current spec](https://www.w3.org/TR/clipboard-apis/#clipboard-event-clipboardchange), we should not fire "clipboardchange" event when a page is not is focus. This is in-line with the current behavior where async clipboard API is not accessible unless the given page is in focus. We do fire "clipboardchange" event when the page regains focus, incase the clipboard contents had changed when the page was out of focus. Note that even if the clipboard had changed multiple times while the page was out of focus, we will only fire a single "clipboardchange" event when the page regains focus. This is because the event is designed to indicate that the clipboard contents are different from what they were when the page lost focus, rather than tracking every individual change that occurred while the page was out of focus.

#### 5.2.1 Approach 1 - Page required to be in focus to receive event

##### Pros
1. More defensive and prevents background scripts from misuse of clipboardchange events.

>   1.a) Example - Malicious scripts can detect when a cryptocurrency wallet address is copied to clipboard and replace it with attacker's address and that way redirect payment to attacker's account.  

Reviewer 4: can we ensure 1. a) is starting in new line

Author: Done
